---
layout: post
title:  The <em>Merveilleux</em> ethos of Exeter
date:   2022-05-24 00:17:59 +0200
categories: critique
---


<span class="underline">The “Merveilleux” ethos of *Exeter*</span>

While absorbing the whole Exeter experience I felt a strong sense of
familiarity, although I had never heard anything close to these types of
soundscapes before. It was only until I really contemplated the imagery
of this project that I started to figure out why I felt a connexion to
it. I most often choose music to listen to depending on my interest in
the cover art, that is, if I have no knowledge of the artist. When I
first came across this album, I wasn’t a Bladee (Benjamin Reichwald)
fanatic, but I was certainly attracted to the Exeter and the 333
aesthetics. Observing Exeter’s cover turned out to be surprisingly
revealing to me. The cover art is a painting from Bladee himself.
Recently, he seemed to have discovered a profound interest in creating
these colourful, pointy- shaped, Christian-like canvases. The particular
painting that he chose to be the cover art for the record, has an
interesting human figure on it. I believe this “figure” plays a key role
in understanding Exeter’s identity. It isn’t the character's face that I
think is worth commenting on, it is in fact the hairdo that I find
rather intriguing. It seems to be a reference to the legendary haircuts
from the French classicism period in the 17th and 18th century. The long
curly haired wigs were famously worn by royals and aristocrats. So why
is this detail so important? Listening to the album I felt another link
to this particular epoch. Certain themes from this record resemble those
of a literary subgenre to emerge from this period: the “Contes
merveilleux” (Fairy Tales). I had studied this particular style of
literature at school in France & we were taught about many “Merveilleux”
authors like the Grimm brothers and Charles Perrault. The latter was one
of these “nobles” who rocked this era-defining hairstyle. That’s when it
clicked. Not only did it resonate within me, but I also understood
exactly what the Drain Gang member was going for (whether it was fully
intended or not). He is portraying himself as one of these European
folklore authors from the 1600’s. This makes a lot of sense considering
that the definition of a Conte merveilleux is a “short narrative that
takes place in an imaginary setting, where the characters aren’t
surprised by surreal occurrences”. This is exactly what the essence of
*<span class="underline">Exeter</span>* is.

However, this isn’t new territory for the swede, I can recall him
mentioning Fairy Tales since Sugar in 2016. Only this time he has made a
complete body of work encapsulating the Tale spirit. Just like
“l’univers merveilleux” was to children in the past, Exeter is a
form of escapism. When you enter this world all the sounds are bright
and bubbly. The lyrics are more amorous than ever. The sounds aren’t
played, they are sprinkled. The hypnotic choruses are as close to what
enchantment feels like. This is one of the most well-structured Bladee
albums, it’s kept short and sweet, it’s consistent and the transitions
blend each track into each other in an organic fashion. The songs
couldn’t be used as singles. The featuring’s don’t feel like “feats”.
The one producer, DJ Gud, doesn’t make it come off as collab tape. I
would rather qualify this album as an experience. The cohesiveness of
the record is also due to the chronological story that flows through the
track list so smoothly. Benjamin tells us this love story that goes all
the way from falling in love, to walking up the church steps.

The opener MIRROR (HYMN) – INTRO, is an introduction to this new version
of Bladee. Since the release of this record, he has adopted a more
mature style, an upbeat sound and a positive mindset. The Buddhist type
of beliefs that he mentions in this track, leads us to think that he is
now pursuing a spiritual route. He repeatedly talks about the *“mirror
in the way”* & *the “ego in the way”*: he wishes to drop egocentric
thoughts and self-consciousness to get closer to enlightenment. In
*<span class="underline">WONDERLAND</span>*, we go down a rabbit whole
of cute energy. The bouncing instrumental sounds like a DJ is scratching
a bunch of bubbles on his turntable. Bladee and Ecco2K’s chemistry is so
natural, not only because they are lifelong collaborators, but also
because Ecco’s androgynous demeanour compliments Exeter’s endearing
character so well. *“If you were to tell a story, how would it go, would
I be in it yes or no?”* says Bladee. This line is delivered in a
juvenile tone and level of vocabulary. It has a high school romance
sentiment about it, not in a weird MGK way, but in an innocent Taylor
Swift *<span class="underline">Love story</span>* way. Music listeners
are usually accustomed to the detrimental side of love, but in this case
it is quite the opposite. He is simply enjoying the moment and is very
open to express his fondness for his partner. At times, Exeter might
even come across as feeling a bit too perfect… there doesn't seem to be
any negative aspects in the evolving storyline. Well, we do have to keep
in mind the fact that we are in a Tale, meaning that it could just be a
completely fabricated diegesis... The glitchy and heavy based
*<span class="underline">MERRY-GO-ROUND</span>*, serves as a reminder
that the story being told is likely fictional. He says “*it’s just like
in a fairy tale*” & “*it’s all in my head, got imaginary friends*”.
These lyrics and the chorus “*Go-round, Merry-go-round*'', give the
impression that he is a lunatic going round and round in circles
dreaming about this imaginary world where there are no flaws.
*<span class="underline">RAINBOW STAR (LOVE IS ALL)</span>* and
*<span class="underline">DNA RAIN</span>* are sonically remarkable, they
both feature futuristic digital sounds swirling around from left to
right. These deeply immersive moments feel like entering a portal, which
makes sense considering that they have a transitional purpose.

Despite being drenched in contemporary and technological sounds,
*<span class="underline">Exeter</span>* also features medieval and
religious undertones. In addition to perfectly tying up the concept of
the album, the last two tracks make this middle-aged environment come to
life. The songs subtleties and the visual art surrounding these cuts
embody these ancient times. *<span class="underline">LOVESTORY</span>*
sounds exactly like walking up the aisle at your wedding. The
lullaby-like production and the lyrics *<span class="underline">“make
the city smell like perfume, make the streets smell like
flowers”</span>* create a ceremonial atmosphere. The church bells
sounding and the explosive fireworks reinforces this feeling. The
following song *<span class="underline">IMAGINARY</span>* is a perfect
continuation of the previous track, as Bladee hops on a “church-bell
type beat”. He paints a picture of what seems to be the ideal honeymoon:
*“oceanside coral reef”*, *“ancient sites”*, *“cross the seven seas”*.
This song and the album finish off with him repeating “*imaginary,
imaginary, imaginary*”. That last segment is like watching the final
scene of a David Lynch film and realising it was just a dream or an
illusion all along. The album depicts this feeling of ‘perfect love’,
but is it all just imaginary?

Over all, I highly enjoyed how Benjamin and DJ Gud managed to capture
this Merveilleux ethos without over doing it. It was put together in a
subtle way: he doesn’t make crystal clear references to any specific
tales, nor does he need to include any type of classical imaginary being
to get the point across. *<span class="underline">Exeter’s</span>*
ethereal and antique nature is still so reminiscent of the original
Fairy Tale era. It’s a peculiar yet interesting form of art to integrate
into cloud rap. It is for releases like these that I consider Bladee and
his collaborators to be some of the most avant-guard creators among
their peers, always offering refreshing ideas to the game.
